but when there wasn't anything to do i
just play video games and for whatever
reason she just
hated video games and i tried to explain
to her i was like it's really cold
outside i don't
have any friends right now we don't have
any money and this is free so this is
what i'm going to be doing
during school between the stress of
trying to pass classes and
her kind of adapting to living with me
and
her working and trying to figure out
what it's like to live with someone that
you've never really lived
with more than like three weeks things
started to get stressful
and you start to realize that you didn't
know the person um
that you that you thought you did things
started to kind of just go
downhill i never claimed to be like a
like a perfect husband
or like that i didn't do anything wrong
but i will say that like i was always
supportive
and i was always trying to you know be
as logical as possible and i know
everyone in the comments is like well
there's your first problem right there
josh you're talking you're telling me
now right but
i think i was a pretty decent husband
but i think the stress
on her end of maybe being the provider
role was kind of too much and i think
over time she kind of started to resent
me
for that because i would go to school
full time and she would work and i would
say things like hey look man it's just
your turn right now you i know you got
to work but when i
when i graduate and i get this degree i
can start making money
and i can i can pamper you a little a
little bit you know and i can
i can do all the things that you want to
do that you're having to put on hold
because you have to deal with me
um you aren't man enough um
i remember one time she said to me
like you're a sex addict and i was like
we mumbo like
once every other month what are you
talking about um
i would try to do things around the
house i would try to like spend time
with her but like
things just aren't the same anymore um
you know i try to cook food
give her foot rub whatever i think it
was a pretty decent husband in that
regard
but when there wasn't anything to do i
would just play video games and for
whatever reason she just
hated video games and i tried to explain
to her i was like it's really cold
outside
i don't have any friends right now we
don't have any money and this is free so
this is what i'm going to be doing
in hindsight right i'd go back in time
and slap myself and like learn code or
something
but at the time it seemed it seemed fine
because there was a lot of stress you
don't want to deal with it
throughout the course of school i
started to find
these books with the finnish word
divorce
labeled on them wait what is this i
didn't know quite enough finish to be
able to decipher what it all said so i'd
take pictures and send them to my
finished friends that i had
at school i just had like two and then
one day i came home from school
and i was at my computer doing some
homework i think and she came and
slapped a piece of paper down on the
desk that said sign it i was like
what is this she says you know what's
going to happen anyway and i said what
are you talking about she said this is a
paper for
[Music]
divorce the topic for this video
is not divorce and it's not video game
edition
and it's not the excuses that we make
for auditions in life
it's the way in which people will tend
to construe a problem
in terms of the solution
they are most comfortable with that may
be totally irrelevant to the problem
itself
so i used to be a scholar of buddhism
for years and years and years
and i talked to my fellow buddhists
some of these people were buddhist monks
some of these were
white people with phds who were experts
in buddhism
different stuff some of them by the way
some of them actually were like
administrators and charities
so people were involved with helping
orphans and starving people like
in the name of the religion buddhism and
you'd say to them something like man you
know i've got a
i've got a real problem um i can't find
a phd program to apply to and get into
and they'd be like oh oh oh oh your
problem is that you're selfish
the problem is that you're thinking
about your own ego
and you're not cultivating selflessness
enough and it's like
um i'm i'm dealing with like a
bureaucratic
issue here like it's really like
it's irrelevant to the problem it's
irrelevant to the solution
you are just preaching to me teaching me
or focusing on
the aspect of this problem that you're
most comfortable with now this really
could extend to
absurd situations like um
well my visa to live in cambodia
was attached to my job and now that
that's over with either i can get a new
job or can apply for a new visa like
as soon as you're dealing with problems
there these are worldly problems
and you could get these same kinds of uh
totally totally otherworldly solutions
when i talk to my father this this
example may be easier for some of you in
the audience to
relate to talk to my father after 10
years of mutually invidious
silence so we had not spoken for fully
10 years he was in denial about that
for me it's the most amusing part of the
story to to remember
like i was talking to him and whenever i
refer to the fact that like we hadn't
spoken for 10 years
i could tell he would come back at me
like oh yeah well i guess it's been a
few years
but like in his mind it's like oh it's
only been two years and six months like
he's playing this game with himself like
it hasn't really been 10 years
and then i asked him this is quite as
you can imagine this was quite close to
the beginning of the conversation it's
like well look
can you hear me okay and he thought
i was talking about like his computer
set up you know microphone
and i was like no no no no the last time
i talked to you
like you were scheduled to go to the
hospital and have an operation because
you were going deaf
you know like and he got furious and he
started shouting at me and he said
like you're delusional that was 10 years
ago
[Music]
he just he just stopped he was like
oh i guess it really has been teddy you
know yeah it's been 10 years we didn't
talk for 10 years
you know he hadn't talked for 10 years
and again right at the start of this
conversation my first time talking to my
father in 10 years
he starts laying in on me for why
he thinks a particular job i had didn't
work out i think at that time
i don't think it was the most recent job
i had for whatever reason
he starts laying into why this job
didn't work out for me
and now part of my response this is so
wait you know we haven't spoken 10 years
you you never talked to me about this
you've never read anything about this
you didn't talk to my
employer like where is this even coming
where did you get this
this theory but like his theory was that
my problem was a lack of commitment that
like i had this really great job working
in the publishing industry
but somehow i just wasn't committed
enough to it
now this really is his religion this
really is
what he's into in the same sense that
those buddhist pilgrims
are into preaching selflessness like you
may not realize but like
my father's problem in his life has been
lack of commitment
he at one point he had three different
women pregnant at the same time
he's leaving one woman for another he's
leaving one you know he's had commitment
issues in his life what i mean maybe one
of the problems he's been talking to his
own therapist about
during those 10 years where he didn't
talk you know was uh
was commitment but like he's coming at
me like as if my problem in life
and my problem with this particular job
was lack a minute he knows nothing about
it
and i try to get through to him by using
some like real specific examples that
challenge what
whatever he imagines about this job i
said to him you know
i was the only employee who spoke
english on that job do you do you
realize that
it's like of course he had no idea he
like imagines this is some office tower
full of people with
suits and ties speaking english in
thailand
right this is not the case at all i was
i was literally the only person who
spoke english as their first language
in whole company i said you know um
i was the only able-bodied person in the
whole company
every other employee was physically
disabled and
pretty seriously physically which is an
interesting thing the boston company
decided
he knew this um kind of special home for
helping to train
uh disabled people to have a better life
it wasn't it wasn't an orphanage but it
was
this kind of special live-in uh training
program kind of thing
and uh you know he worked with them to
hire all of the staff
myself being an extraordinary exception
and i said you know that company
all the initiative all the new ideas
uh just all the commercial impetus all
the successes and all the failures of
that company came from one man
and that man was going deaf
and maybe you can relate to that barry i
i'd say maybe you can relate to that dad
i never called him dad
i didn't mean he was barry lord i was i
called him by his name
i was like you know i think you know
what it's like
to be the director of a small company
who's going deaf
and where everyone relies on you and
your decisions and you're actually
getting frustrated having difficulty
communicating with people and they're
having difficulty communicating that's
prob
that exact scenario you've had
years of dealing with because my father
was going down for you could say he did
go down
and he was such an [ __ ] that nobody
noticed
you know like really he was such a he
was such an [ __ ] he'd be in
situations where
people were speaking french and he was
dead and he was just like replying
in french to people and like i i spoke
enough french that i could recognize
this and it was happening
he would give replies that were
completely irrelevant to what had been
said
in french i think he wasn't aware of it
like when he was speaking english
like he was maybe reading lips and
things he was taking he was picking up
on cues more so it seemed like he could
hear what you're saying but then when he
switches into french it was like
whoa like the topic of the conversation
there's absolutely no
no relationship
but yeah i mean before he went deaf he
already was just such a self-centered
[ __ ] that like you know
you know he was just you know he was on
his own track whatever he wanted the
conversation to be and disregarded the
people around him so a lot of people
a lot of people didn't notice a problem
hey maybe it was a credit to me or that
i should i think i had the closest
relationship with him of anyone i don't
think any of his other sons knew him the
way i did
that uh yeah i can say that i can say
that about you dad i noticed when you
went to hell i noticed the difference
um and it's this kid
i've i don't know old he is you know he
runs through a bunch of different
reasons for his divorce or contributing
causes for why that that marriage
uh didn't work out he went up from 180
pounds to 240 pounds
some people would tell this story
with that being the main focus with that
being the part of the problem and the
part of the solution that they're
comfortable
talking about there are youtube channels
that is totally you know devoted
i can imagine right now a different
youtuber breaking down this whole
timeline
completely focused around weight gain
and exercise and diet
and like and really you know and she
lost interest in me and
you know and it is it's part of his
story but it's it's demoted and it's
it's not you know he just mentions it
that he gained weight and then at the
end
he started to lose weight because he
knew he was going to be single again
could be you know for that particular
could be the reason
he mentions the extent to which he was
playing
video games and i think we all know i
mean some of you you've never heard of
this youtuber before
if you know anything about this guy um
he is massively massively downplaying
underrating the significance of playing
video games and in that one moment
where he mentions that his girlfriend
for some reason
uh hated video games or hated him
playing video games
that she's at home with him the
situation was that she was paying the
bills because he was a full-time
university student
but she comes home and he's sitting on
the couch playing video games for hours
and hours
and no offense but in this guy's case
he's admitted to some extent he was
addicted to world of warcraft and so on
he's putting in all these hours playing
video games and what are you not doing
when you're playing games you're not
building that relationship right
the marriage is not becoming whatever it
could have become and of course it's
possible they're
they're missing about he mentions real
briefly in there
they only had sex
about once every two months
don't you think that i mean there's a
chicken and ag issue here
you know there's a cause-and-effect
question but don't you think
that alone could explain why the
marriage didn't work out or why you
why you got divorced but that's not his
approach at all
his explanation his assessment his
analysis of the problem and how he
presents the solution
totally has to do with earning money
because that's what he's comfortable
addressing
so this is a funny kind of bias and i
think people will be more aware of it if
we had like one catchphrase for it
negotiators the way you know
people have all these catchphrases for
logical fallacies oh that's a begging of
the question fallacy that's an appeal to
nature fallacy
i don't think we have a catchphrase for
that tendency
we do have this saying in english uh a
man who's carrying a hammer
tends to see every problem as a nail
but that's not quite what's going on
here right he's aware of and he's even
mentioning
these other factors but his assessment
his analysis
what he has to say about the problem
it's
totally distorted by um the solution
that he's comfortable talking about the
solution that in a real
sense he believes in so i mean coming
back to
the buddhists mentioned at the start of
this
i think those people really believed
that if i could be more selfless i would
get into a phd program
like it's completely ridiculous it's
like oh no this isn't the problem to do
with paper
i think those people really believed
like oh like if you could just meditate
and focus on selflessness and set aside
the belief in the soul
like this whole thing with getting a
stamp in your passport
and a paperwork for a visa that just
wouldn't matter to you
i mean you could be in prison you can be
real selfless in prison because you
overstayed your work visa you didn't
care about these legal
runs uh-huh yeah but i mean i think
i think there's an aspect of belief
there and that other hypothetical
youtube channel i'm talking about
like if there were a youtuber who told
the same story of the marriage breaking
up the divorce
entirely in terms of weight gain and
weight loss i think that would be
someone who really believed in that
that there would be people out there who
believed that their marriage fell apart
because they got fat and they could have
saved it if only the lost way and where
their message to you in the audience is
hey if you're more self-disciplined if
you care about your health you care
about your appearance
you know then you can get this with you
and
when i call myself a nihilist it's not
just because i'm opposed to
circumcision or celebrating christmas
i am opposed to those things but you
know living with nihilism it also means
you kind of challenge and reject your
beliefs
in this more subtle invisible and petty
way we're saying well i don't believe in
one thing or another like there's
certainly a level when i'm looking at
this guy's
uh divorce in which i look at it with a
complete open mind
i don't know i don't know why his
marriage shouldn't work out
i don't know if the fact that they had
sex less often than once a month
they were like 21 years old or something
by the way so not people in their 60s
i don't know if that was crucially
important to her
or crucially important to him i don't
know if he's lying to himself but
i don't know like i'm even though it's
impossible for me to imagine
i'm willing to believe there are people
who could have a totally happy marriage
only having sex once a month i have a
vivid imagination but not that vivid
what can i tell you
but sure you know maybe that maybe that
exists maybe that's out there
you know um i'm willing to listen to all
these things
with a kind of radically open mind with
no
prefabricated conclusions that i'm
trying to force the facts to fit into
and then i examine my own life that way
also
right i think that's a really difficult
discipline espec especially when you're
young and hot-blooded
and when you fear the sense of uh
self-doubt
that's involved that sort of emotion to
have the self-doubt to look back
on your own marriage or your own divorce
or let's say your own experience
university for this guy they all
overlapped he was in university
and maybe his greatest mistake really
was playing video games during those few
crucial years when all those things
overlap when he had the opportunity to
become a citizen of finland
when he was supposed to be learning the
finnish language in his spare time when
he was a full-time university student
and he was married to this woman
who within those same few years lost
patience with him
got disgusted with seeing him and
sitting there on the couch playing video
games
gaining 50 pounds all these things came
together
um it's not hard to see why it didn't
last
but the decision we get to make now
is what do we regret right like people
think of regret as if it's dead weight
and it's not regret is something useful
regret is something powerful
regret is something dynamic he can look
back on his life
and i think really take on a positive
new direction that could include
quitting video games through regret and
i think each of us in this way as life
goes on
we have new things to learn by
re-examining
the past unencumbered by the beliefs
unencumbered by the assumptions the
hopes and expectations that were with us
when we lived through it the first time